Space and Move-Optimal Arbitrary Pattern
Formation on Infinite Rectangular Grid by
Oblivious Robot Swarm
Avisek Sharma #
Department of Mathematics, Jadavpur University, India
Satakshi Ghosh #
Department of Mathematics, Jadavpur University, India
Pritam Goswami #
Department of Mathematics, Jadavpur University, India
Buddhadeb Sau #
Department of Mathematics, Jadavpur University, India
Abstract
Arbitrary Pattern Formation (APF) is a fundamental coordination problem in swarm robotics. It
requires a set of autonomous robots (mobile computing units) to form an arbitrary pattern (given as
input) starting from any initial pattern. This problem has been extensively investigated in continuous
and discrete scenarios, with this study focusing on the discrete variant. A set of robots is placed on
the nodes of an infinite rectangular grid graph embedded in the euclidean plane. The movements of
each robot is restricted to one of the four neighboring grid nodes from its current position. The robots
are autonomous, anonymous, identical, and homogeneous, and operate Look-Compute-Move cycles.
In this work, we adopt the classical OBLOT robot model, meaning the robots have no persistent
memory or explicit communication methods, yet they possess full and unobstructed visibility. This
work proposes an algorithm that solves the APF problem in a fully asynchronous scheduler assuming
the initial configuration is asymmetric. The considered performance measures of the algorithm are
space and number of moves required for the robots. The algorithm is asymptotically move-optimal.
Here, we provide a definition of space complexity that takes the visibility issue into consideration.
We observe an obvious lower bound D of the space complexity and show that the proposed algorithm
has the space complexity D + 4. On comparing with previous related works, we show that this is
the first proposed algorithm considering OBLOT robot model that is asymptotically move-optimal
and has the least space complexity which is almost optimal.
2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Distributed algorithms
Keywords and phrases Distributed algorithms, Oblivious robots, Optimal algorithms, Swarm
robotics, Space optimization, and Rectangular grid
Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.SAND.2024.20
Related Version Full Version: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.11190 [14]
Funding The first and the third authors are supported by the University Grants Commission (UGC),
India. The second author is supported by the West Bengal State Government Fellowship Scheme.
The fourth author is supported by the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), India
1 Introduction
Swarm robotics involves a group of simple computing units referred to as robots that operate
autonomously without having any centralized control. Moreover, the robots are generally
anonymous (no unique identifier), homogeneous (all robots execute the same algorithm), and
identical (physically indistinguishable). Generally on activation, a robot first takes a snapshot
of its surroundings. This phase is called the Look phase. Then based on the snapshot an
© Avisek Sharma, Satakshi Ghosh, Pritam Goswami, and Buddhadeb Sau;
licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0
3rd Symposium on Algorithmic Foundations of Dynamic Networks (SAND 2024).
Editors: Arnaud Casteigts and Fabian Kuhn; Article No. 20; pp. 20:1–20:17
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl Publishing, Germany
A. Sharma, S. Ghosh, P. Goswami, and B. Sau 20:3
arises due to the existence of intermediate configurations that demand a spatial extent that
cannot be accommodated within the confined grid. Moreover, when the spatial demand
for an APF algorithm on a grid increases, the count of patterns that can be formed within
a bounded grid becomes noticeably fewer compared to the count of patterns formable on
the same grid with a lower space requirement. To be more specific, patterns that are “big
enough” can not be formed if the space requirement is “big” on a bounded grid. So, the
requirement of large space compromises better utilization of the space.
Moreover, even if complete visibility is entertained for theoretical considerations, this
assumption does not hold practical validity within an unbounded environment. In the context
of a bounded region, it can be applied with the premise that the environment is finite, and
the entire environment falls within the visibility range of each robot. However, introducing
the concept of an infinite grid disrupts this assumption. In situations where the grid lacks
bounds, it is possible that due to substantial spatial requirements, certain robots might stray
beyond the visibility range of others. To the best of our knowledge, there remains an absence
of work that addresses the APF challenge within the constraints of limited visibility, an
asynchronous scheduler, and the absence of any global coordinate agreement. Thus in this
paper, the problem of APF on a grid with minimal spatial requirement has been considered.
1.2 Related Work
In the discrete setting, the problem is first studied in [1]. Here, the authors solved the problem
deterministically on an infinite rectangular grid with OBLOT robots in an asynchronous
scheduler. Later in [5], the authors studied the problem on a regular tessellation graph. In
[1], authors count the total required moves asymptotically and also give an asymptotic lower
bound for the move complexity, i.e., total number of moves required to solve the problem. In
[5], authors did not count the total number of moves required for their proposed algorithm.
In [9], the authors provided two deterministic algorithms for solving the problem in an
asynchronous scheduler. The first algorithm of [9] solves the APF problem for the OBLOT
model. The move complexity of this algorithm matches the asymptotic lower bound given
in [1]. Thus, this algorithm is asymptotically move-optimal. The second algorithm of [9]
solves the problem for the LUMI model, and this algorithm is asymptotically move-optimal.
Further authors showed that the algorithm is time-optimal, i.e., the number of epochs (a
time interval in which each robot activates at least once) to complete the algorithm is
asymptotically optimal. In [11], the authors provided a deterministic algorithm for solving
the problem with opaque (non-transparent) point robots in the LUMI model with an
asynchronous scheduler assuming one-axis agreement. In [10], the authors proposed two
randomized algorithms for solving the APF problem in an asynchronous scheduler. The
second algorithm works for the OBLOT model. This algorithm is asymptotically moveoptimal
and time-optimal. The randomization in this algorithm is only used to break any
present symmetry in the initial configuration. If the initial configuration is asymmetric then
the algorithm is deterministic. The first algorithm works for opaque point robots with the
LUMI model. This algorithm is also asymptotically move-optimal and time-optimal. In [12],
the authors solve the problem with opaque fat robots (robots having nontrivial dimension)
with the LUMI model in an asynchronous scheduler assuming one-axis agreement. In [15],
the authors provide an asymptotically move-optimal algorithm solving this problem with
robots in the LUMI model. The work also considered a special requirement and showed that
the algorithm is space-optimal. In the next section, we formally state the space complexity
of an algorithm and discuss the space complexity of the mentioned works.
A. Sharma, S. Ghosh, P. Goswami, and B. Sau 20:7
Problem Statement
Suppose a swarm of robots is placed in an infinite rectangle grid such that no two robots
are on the same grid node and the configuration formed by the robots is asymmetric. The
Arbitrary Pattern Formation (APF) problem asks to design a distributed deterministic
algorithm following which the robots autonomously can form any arbitrary but specific
(target) pattern, which is provided to the robots as an input, without scaling it. The target
pattern is given to the robots as a set of vertices in the grid with respect to a cartesian
coordinate system. We assume that the number of vertices in the target pattern is the same
as the number of robots present in the configuration. The pattern is considered to be formed
if a configuration is formed and that is the same with target pattern up to translations,
rotations, and reflections. The algorithm should be collision-free, i.e., no two robots should
occupy the same node at any time, and two robots must not cross each other through the
same edge.
Admissible Initial Configurations
We assume that in the initial configuration there is no multiplicity point, i.e., no grid node
that is occupied by multiple robots. This assumption is necessary because all robots run
the same deterministic algorithm, and two robots located at the same point have the same
view. Thus, it is deterministically impossible to separate them afterward. Next, suppose the
initial configuration has a reflectional symmetry with no robot on the axis of symmetry or
a rotational symmetry with no robot on the point of rotation. Then it can be shown that
no deterministic algorithm can form an asymmetric target configuration from this initial
configuration. However, if the initial configuration has reflectional symmetry with some
robots on the axis of symmetry or rotational symmetry with a robot at the point of rotation,
then symmetry may be broken by a specific move of such robots. But making such a move
may not be very easy as the robots’ moves are restricted to their adjacent grid nodes only.
In this work, we assume the initial configuration to be asymmetric.
3 Space-optimal Arbitrary Pattern Formation on a Grid Line
In this section, we solve this problem on a discrete straight line. Suppose we have an infinite
path graph P = {(i, i + 1) | i ∈ Z} embedded on a straight line. Suppose k robots are placed
on P at distinct nodes. A configuration is defined similarly as done in the previous section
by considering G = P. The target pattern is given as a set of k distinct positive integers.
Leader Election and Global Coordinate Setup
We assume the initial configuration of robots does not have reflectional symmetry. First, we
set up a global coordinate system that can be agreed upon by all the robots. Suppose C is a
configuration having no reflectional symmetry. For a configuration, we define the smallest
enclosing line segment (SEL) to be the smallest line segment in length that contains all the
robots in the configuration. Let L = AB be the SEL of the configuration C. Consider two
binary strings of length |AB| (the length of a line segment is the number of grid points on
the line segment) called λA and λB with respect to the endpoints of L. Let λA = {ai}|AB|
i=1
such that ai = 1 if and only if the node on the AB line segment having distance i − 1 from
A is occupied by a robot. Similarly, we define λB. Since C has no reflectional symmetry,
λA and λB are different. Therefore one of them is lexicographically smaller than the other.
20:10 Arbitrary Pattern Formation on Rectangular Grid by Robot Swarm
If C is asymmetric then a unique string can be elected and hence, all robots can agree
on a global coordinate system. By “up” (“down”) and “right” (“left”), we shall refer to the
positive (“negative”) directions of the x-axis and y-axis of the coordinate system, respectively.
The robot responsible for the first 1 in this string is considered the head robot of C and the
robot responsible for the last 1 is considered the tail of C. The robot other than the head
and tail is termed the inner robot. We define, C′ = C \ {tail} and C′′ = C \ {head, tail}.
Target Pattern Embedding
Here we discuss how robots are supposed to embed the target pattern when they agree on
a global coordinate system. The target configuration Ctarget is given with respect to some
arbitrary coordinate system. Let the R′ = A′B′C′D′ be the SER of the target pattern, an
m′ × n′ rectangle with |A′D′| ≥ |A′B′| > 1. We associate binary strings similarly for R′ as
done for R. Let λA′B′ be the lexicographically largest (but may not be unique because the
Ctarget can be symmetric) among all other strings for R′. The first target position on this
string λA′B′ is said to be head-target and denoted as htarget and the last target position is
said to be tail-target and denoted as ttarget. The rest of the target positions are called inner
target positions. Then the target pattern is to be embedded such that A′ is the origin, −−−→
A′B′
direction is along the positive x-axis, and −−−→
A′D′ direction is along the positive y-axis. Next,
let us consider the case when |A′B′| = 1, that is when the SER of the target pattern is a line
A′D′. Let λA′D′ be the lexicographically largest string between λA′D′ and λD′A′ . Then the
target is embedded in such a way that A′ is at the origin and −−−→
A′D′ direction is along the
positive y-axis. The positive x-axis direction can be decided randomly by the robot which
first moves out of that line making the SER a rectangle. We define, C′
target = Ctarget \{ttarget}
and C′′
target = Ctarget \ {htarget, ttarget}.
4.2 Outline of the Proposed Algorithm
The algorithm is logically divided into seven phases3. A robot infers which phase it is in from
the configuration visible at that time. It does so by checking which conditions in Table 2
are fulfilled. We assume that in a visible configuration, no robot is seen on an edge. We
maintain such assumption by an additional condition that, if a robot sees a configuration
where a robot is on an edge then discard the snapshot and go to sleep.
A Preview of the Algorithm
Firstly the tail robot moves upwards to reach a horizontal line such that neither the
horizontal line nor other horizontal lines above it contain any robot or target position
(Phase I).
Next the head robot moves left to reach the origin (Phase II).
Then the tail robot moves a few steps upwards to remove the chance of occurrence of
symmetry during the later inner robot movements (phase I).
Then the tail robot moves rightwards to reach a vertical line such that neither the
vertical line nor any vertical line to the right of it contains any robot or target positions
(Phase III).
3 The phases are assigned numerical names, yet the sequence of these numerals doesn’t precisely correspond
to the sequence of their execution during algorithm execution.